[Doc] [KubeRay] Add tutorial for connecting to google cloud storage bucket from GKE RayCluster (#38858)
ray-project/ray: doc/source/cluster/kubernetes/user-guides/gke-gcs-bucket.md

```bash
gsutil iam ch serviceAccount:my-iam-sa@my-project-id.iam.gserviceaccount.com:roles/storage.admin gs://my-bucket
```

## Create a minimal RayCluster YAML manifest

You can download the RayCluster YAML manifest for this tutorial with `curl` as follows:

```bash
curl -LO https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ray-project/kuberay/master/ray-operator/config/samples/ray-cluster.gke-bucket.yaml
```

The key parts are the following lines:

```yaml
      spec:
        serviceAccountName: my-ksa
        nodeSelector:
          iam.gke.io/gke-metadata-server-enabled: "true"
```

Include these lines in every pod spec of your Ray cluster. This example uses a single-node cluster (1 head node and 0 worker nodes) for simplicity.

## Create the RayCluster

```bash
kubectl apply -f ray-cluster.gke-bucket.yaml
```

## Test GCS bucket access from the RayCluster

Use `kubectl get pod` to get the name of the Ray head pod.  Then run the following command to get a shell in the Ray head pod:

```bash
kubectl exec -it raycluster-mini-head-xxxx -- /bin/bash
```

> In the shell, run `pip install google-cloud-storage` to install the Google Cloud Storage Python client library. Then run the following Python code to test access to the bucket:

Author: ```suggestion
In the shell, run `pip install google-cloud-storage` to install the Google Cloud Storage Python client library. 

(For production use cases, you will need to make sure `google-cloud-storage` is installed on every node of your cluster, or use `ray.init(runtime_env={"pip": ["google-cloud-storage"]})` to have the package installed as needed at runtime -- see <https://docs.ray.io/en/latest/ray-core/handling-dependencies.html#runtime-environments> for more details.)

Then run the following Python code to test access to the bucket:
```

(kuberay-gke-bucket)=
# Configuring KubeRay to use Google Cloud Storage Buckets in GKE

If you are already familiar with Workload Identity in GKE, you can skip this document. The gist is that you need to specify a service account in each of the Ray pods after linking your Kubernetes service account to your Google Cloud service account. Otherwise, read on.

> We will follow an abridged version of the documentation at <https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/how-to/workload-identity>. The full documentation is worth reading if you are interested in the details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example is an abridged version of the documentation at <https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/how-to/workload-identity>. The full documentation is worth reading if you are interested in the details.
```

```bash
gcloud container clusters get-credentials cloud-bucket-cluster --zone us-west1-b --project my-project-id
```

## Create an IAM Service Account

```bash
gcloud iam service-accounts create my-iam-sa
```

## Create a Kubernetes Service Account

```bash
kubectl create serviceaccount my-ksa
```

## Link the Kubernetes Service Account to the IAM Service Account and vice versa

In the following two commands, replace `default` with your namespace if you are not using the default namespace.

```bash
gcloud iam service-accounts add-iam-policy-binding my-iam-sa@my-project-id.iam.gserviceaccount.com \
    --role roles/iam.workloadIdentityUser \
    --member "serviceAccount:my-project-id.svc.id.goog[default/my-ksa]"
```

```bash
kubectl annotate serviceaccount my-ksa \
    --namespace default \
    iam.gke.io/gcp-service-account=my-iam-sa@my-project-id.iam.gserviceaccount.com
```

## Create a Google Cloud Storage Bucket and allow the Google Cloud Service Account to access it

Please follow the documentation at <https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/creating-buckets> to create a bucket using the Google Cloud Console or the `gsutil` command line tool.  

> For this example, we will give our principal `my-iam-sa@my-project-id.iam.gserviceaccount.com` "Storage Admin" permissions on the bucket. You can do this in the Google Cloud Console ("Permissions" tab under "Buckets" > "Bucket Details") or with the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example gives the principal `my-iam-sa@my-project-id.iam.gserviceaccount.com` "Storage Admin" permissions on the bucket. Enable the permissions in the Google Cloud Console ("Permissions" tab under "Buckets" > "Bucket Details") or with the following command:
```

```bash
gsutil iam ch serviceAccount:my-iam-sa@my-project-id.iam.gserviceaccount.com:roles/storage.admin gs://my-bucket
```

## Create a minimal RayCluster YAML manifest

> You can download the RayCluster YAML manifest for this tutorial via `curl` as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can download the RayCluster YAML manifest for this tutorial with `curl` as follows:
```

```bash
curl -LO https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ray-project/kuberay/master/ray-operator/config/samples/ray-cluster.gke-bucket.yaml
```

> The key parts here are the following lines:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The key parts are the following lines:
```

```yaml
      spec:
        serviceAccountName: my-ksa
        nodeSelector:
          iam.gke.io/gke-metadata-server-enabled: "true"
```

> These should be included in every pod spec of your Ray cluster. In this example, we are just using a single-node cluster (1 head node and 0 worker nodes) for simplicity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Include these lines in every pod spec of your Ray cluster. This example uses a single-node cluster (1 head node and 0 worker nodes) for simplicity.
```

## Create the RayCluster

```bash
kubectl apply -f ray-cluster.gke-bucket.yaml
```

## Test GCS bucket access from the RayCluster

Use `kubectl get pod` to get the name of the Ray head pod.  Then run the following command to get a shell in the Ray head pod:

```bash
kubectl exec -it raycluster-mini-head-xxxx -- /bin/bash
```

In the shell, run `pip install google-cloud-storage` to install the Google Cloud Storage Python client library. Then run the following Python code to test access to the bucket:

```python
import ray
import os
from google.cloud import storage

> RAY_GCS_BUCKET = "my-bucket"

Reviewer 2: `RAY_GCS_...` is a bit confusing for Ray folks. Maybe use `GCP_GCS_BUCKET` instead?

RAY_GCS_FILE = "test_file.txt"

ray.init(address="auto")

@ray.remote
def check_gcs_read_write():
    client = storage.Client()
    bucket = client.get_bucket(RAY_GCS_BUCKET)
    blob = bucket.blob(RAY_GCS_FILE)
    
    # Write to the bucket
    blob.upload_from_string("Hello, Ray on GKE!")
    
    # Read from the bucket
    content = blob.download_as_text()
    
    return content

result = ray.get(check_gcs_read_write.remote())
print(result)

> ray.shutdown()

Reviewer 2: Is this necessary?

Author: Good point, removed

> # Configuring KubeRay to use Google Cloud Storage Buckets in GKE

Reviewer 2: Add `(XXXXXXX)=` in this doc and refer it in `user-guides.md`.

Author: Thanks, done!

> If you are already familiar with Workload Identity in GKE, you can skip this document.  The gist is that you need to specify a service account in each of the Ray pods after linking your Kubernetes service account to your Google Cloud service account.  Otherwise, read on.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you are already familiar with Workload Identity in GKE, you can skip this document. The gist is that you need to specify a service account in each of the Ray pods after linking your Kubernetes service account to your Google Cloud service account. Otherwise, read on.
```

> We will follow an abridged version of the documentation at <https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/how-to/workload-identity>.  The full documentation is worth reading if you are interested in the details.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We will follow an abridged version of the documentation at <https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/how-to/workload-identity>. The full documentation is worth reading if you are interested in the details.
```

## Create a Kubernetes cluster on GKE

For this example, we will create a minimal KubeRay cluster using GKE.

Run this command and all following commands on your local machine or on the [Google Cloud Shell](https://cloud.google.com/shell). If running from your local machine, you will need to install the [Google Cloud SDK](https://cloud.google.com/sdk/docs/install).

```bash
gcloud container clusters create cloud-bucket-cluster \
    --num-nodes=1 --min-nodes 0 --max-nodes 1 --enable-autoscaling \
    --zone=us-west1-b --machine-type e2-standard-8 \
    --workload-pool=my-project-id.svc.id.goog # Replace my-project-id with your GCP project ID
```

This command creates a Kubernetes cluster named `cloud-bucket-cluster` with 1 node in the `us-west1-b` zone. In this example, we use the `e2-standard-8` machine type, which has 8 vCPUs and 32 GB RAM.

Now get credentials for the cluster to use with `kubectl`:

```bash

> gcloud container clusters get-credentials cloud-bucket-cluster --zone us-west1-b --project my-project-id

Reviewer 2: Should we provide instructions about how to get `my-project-id`?

Author: To do anything in GCP the user has to create a project and project ID, so I think it's okay not to discuss it in the doc.

Author: Well it doesn't hurt, so I added a link

```

## Create an IAM Service Account

```bash
gcloud iam service-accounts create my-iam-sa
```

## Create a Kubernetes Service Account

```bash
kubectl create serviceaccount my-ksa
```

## Link the Kubernetes Service Account to the IAM Service Account and vice versa

In the following two commands, replace `default` with your namespace if you are not using the default namespace.

```bash
gcloud iam service-accounts add-iam-policy-binding my-iam-sa@my-project-id.iam.gserviceaccount.com \

>     --role roles/iam.workloadIdentityUser \

Reviewer 2: Where is `roles/iam.workloadIdentityUser` from?

Author: I'm not sure about the details. I think it's a predefined role built into GCP.  The user can find more details at https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/how-to/workload-identity which is linked in the doc

>     --member "serviceAccount:my-project-id.svc.id.goog[default/my-ksa]"

Reviewer 2: `goog` or `google`?

Author: It seems to be `goog`.  (I copy/pasted from some tutorial, and the manual test worked.)

```

```bash
kubectl annotate serviceaccount my-ksa \
    --namespace default \
    iam.gke.io/gcp-service-account=my-iam-sa@my-project-id.iam.gserviceaccount.com
```

## Create a Google Cloud Storage Bucket and allow the Google Cloud Service Account to access it

Please follow the documentation at <https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/creating-buckets> to create a bucket using the Google Cloud Console or the `gsutil` command line tool.  

> For this example, we will give our principal `my-iam-sa@my-project-id.iam.gserviceaccount.com` "Storage Admin" permissions on the bucket.  You can do this in the Google Cloud Console ("Permissions" tab under "Buckets" > "Bucket Details") or with the following command:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For this example, we will give our principal `my-iam-sa@my-project-id.iam.gserviceaccount.com` "Storage Admin" permissions on the bucket. You can do this in the Google Cloud Console ("Permissions" tab under "Buckets" > "Bucket Details") or with the following command:
```

```bash
gsutil iam ch serviceAccount:my-iam-sa@my-project-id.iam.gserviceaccount.com:roles/storage.admin gs://my-bucket
```

## Create a minimal RayCluster YAML manifest

Create a file named `raycluster.yaml` with the following contents:

> ```yaml

Reviewer 2: Can you move the YAML to the KubeRay repo and link it here?

```sh
curl -LO ....
kubectl apply -f ....
```

Author: Done

apiVersion: ray.io/v1alpha1
kind: RayCluster
metadata:

>   labels:

Reviewer 2: We can remove `labels` here.

    controller-tools.k8s.io: "1.0"
  name: raycluster-mini
spec:

>   rayVersion: '2.5.0'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  rayVersion: '2.6.3'
```

  headGroupSpec:
    rayStartParams:
      dashboard-host: '0.0.0.0'
    template:
      spec:
        serviceAccountName: my-ksa
        nodeSelector:
          iam.gke.io/gke-metadata-server-enabled: "true"
        containers:
        - name: ray-head
          image: rayproject/ray:2.6.3
          resources:
            limits:
              cpu: 1
              memory: 2Gi
            requests:

>               cpu: 500m

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
              cpu: 1
```

              memory: 2Gi
          ports:
          - containerPort: 6379
            name: gcs-server
          - containerPort: 8265
            name: dashboard
          - containerPort: 10001
            name: client
```

The key parts here are the following lines:

```yaml
      spec:
        serviceAccountName: my-ksa
        nodeSelector:
          iam.gke.io/gke-metadata-server-enabled: "true"
```

> These should be included in every pod spec of your Ray cluster.  In this example, we are just using a single-node cluster (1 head node and 0 worker nodes) for simplicity.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These should be included in every pod spec of your Ray cluster. In this example, we are just using a single-node cluster (1 head node and 0 worker nodes) for simplicity.
```

## Create the RayCluster

```bash
kubectl apply -f raycluster.yaml
```

## Test GCS bucket access from the RayCluster

Use `kubectl get pod` to get the name of the Ray head pod.  Then run the following command to get a shell in the Ray head pod:

```bash
kubectl exec -it raycluster-mini-head-xxxx -- /bin/bash
```

> In the shell, run `pip install google-cloud-storage` to install the Google Cloud Storage Python client library.  Then run the following Python code to test access to the bucket:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the shell, run `pip install google-cloud-storage` to install the Google Cloud Storage Python client library. Then run the following Python code to test access to the bucket:
```

Author: I don't think this makes a difference in the rendered markdown.  Some people were taught to use two spaces after a period and it's a hard habit to break unfortunately... I'd propose ignoring it until we install a linter that automatically formats it and enforces it

```python
import ray
import os
from google.cloud import storage

RAY_GCS_BUCKET = "my-bucket"

> RAY_GCS_FILE = "test_file.txt"

Reviewer 2: Do we mention this file above?

Author: No, we don't need to create the file when creating the bucket.  The script creates the file, writes to it and reads from it.

> ray.init(address="auto")

Reviewer 2: Why do we need to use Ray?

Author: We don't need to use Ray. My thought was that people using KubeRay use Ray and this just demonstrates that remote Ray processes can still access the bucket (and you don't have to do anything weird with environment variables, etc). If it's confusing I can get rid of it, I don't have a strong opinion

Reviewer 2: > remote Ray processes can still access the bucket

If we install `google-cloud-storage` only on the head Pod, will a task scheduled on a worker node still succeed?

Author: It needs to be installed on all pods.  Alternatively, one can specify `ray.init(runtime_env={"pip": ["google-cloud-storage"]})`
